Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we are currently
gathering some experience and familiarity with
some basic ideas in elementary algebra on our
way to establishing proper foundations for the
subject so at this point we are still talking
relatively loosely and informally about the
subject today I'm going to talk about the binomial
theorem which is of course a major subject for
high school mathematics and an important and
practical tool for algebra it starts out by
expanding a term like a plus B squared we've seen
that that's a squared plus two a B plus B squared
if you now expand a plus B cubed for example
if you take this and you multiply it by a plus
B then you get a cubed plus 3 a squared B plus 3
a B squared plus B cubed and here is a plus B to
the fourth with coefficients 1 4 6 4 1 the terms
all have A's and B's in them with the power of
A's decreasing as we move along and the powers
of be increasing as we move along and there's
a kind of a symmetry as you'd expect between the
A's and the B's and here's a plus B to the fifth
with coefficients 1 5 10 10 5 1 and if you stare
at this for a little while you see that there's a
pattern and there are some pleasant relationships
between the various coefficients from one line to
another and this is usually encoded in a very
familiar kind of table called Pascal's triangle
which all high school students meet and here it
is right here where we've essentially taken the
coefficients of the various lines here and written
them out in rows the binomial theorem is sometimes
presented as something of a mysterious thing
but it really is very systematic consequence
of the distributive law here is the distributive
law applied to a plus B times X plus y we expect
that there's going to be four terms a times X plus
a times y plus B times X plus B times y so there
are the four terms now if we look at this general
formula in the special case when the x and y are
the same as a and B now if we just copied this
over we get a times a plus a times B plus B times
a plus B times B so in reality there are four
terms that you get when you expand out a plus
B squared using the distributive law it's just
that the a B and the B a term happen to be the
same because a and B commute there are numbers
after all and so they coalesce to give us two a
B let's have a look to see what happens if we
multiply three terms each with two components
a plus B times X plus y times C plus D now there
are eight possible terms that result and now when
we look at this general case in the special
case when all the terms are a plus B then the
eight terms look like this a a a plus a a B plus
a B a and so on where I've recorded the order of
the terms in the way they appear and now we see
that the reason why there's three a squared B
occurring in the result is because there are
three terms here that have two A's and one B
in them namely this one this one and this one
so these three terms combine to give us three
a squared B so amongst the original eight terms
some of them are coalescing because they have the
same numbers of A's and B's in them it's telling
us that the coefficients in the binomial theorem
are actually counting something they're counting
the number of ways of writing down a little triple
like this using a certain number of A's and a
certain number of beefs to clarify that idea
let's have a look at a plus B to the fourth here's
a a plus B four times when we multiply these terms
out there's going to be sixteen terms that appear
all together because we have two times two times
two times two choices so we're gonna end up with
the sum of terms of the form X Y Z W where each
of the X Y Z and W can be either a or b and now
there's a nice geometrical way of interpreting
these strings of A's and B's in terms of paths on
a diagram a two-dimensional diagram so we agree
that the letter A represents a step downwards and
the letter B represents a step to the right and
we're starting up here in this little grid so the
word a a be a that particular string of letters
represents a path a path obtained by doing an a
step then another a step then a B step and then
another a step so this is a path from this point
here which we might call 0 0 to this point here
which we might call 3 1 notice that this indexing
has this coordinate as the first entry and this
coordinate as the second now there are 16 such
paths of length 4 altogether and each of these
corresponds to a term in this sum so in other
words the expansion here is just corresponding
to various paths of length 4 that we can go on
in this little grid if we're always either going
down or to the right and we're allowed to take
any four steps we want so for example a plus B
to the fourth which we've seen is this expression
here this coefficient of four represents the four
possible ways of getting from here to here and
what are those four possible ways well there's a
a a B or a a B a or a B a a or b ay ay ay those
are the four different words in the A's and B's
that have three A's all together and one B so we
can record this combinatorial information because
it's really part of combinatorics the art of
counting by writing down the number of paths
on the actual vertex that we're counting from the
origin so there are four paths from here to here
so we could write a four right there there are
six paths from here to here right at this point
we could put a six right there and so we could
encode the binomial theorem in a table where
the grid is oriented like this and what we get
when we do that is something most interesting
and familiar the table that we get is one that we
are very familiar with we could call it Pascal's
array now because it's much like Pascal's triangle
except it's a little bit oriented with a corner up
here instead and what we recognize is that it's
in fact exactly the same as the difference table
for triangular numbers that we've written down a
number of times already so this row right here 1
3 6 10 15 21 20 that's the sequence of triangular
numbers and this is just the difference table for
that sequence so along the diagonals like this we
have the various coefficients of a plus B to the
N in this case N equals 4 1 4 6 4 1 and this
entry 10 is counting the number of paths from
the corner to the position where we're always
either going down or to the right so this gives
us now a new interpretation of what we used to be
thinking about as triangular numbers tetrahedral
numbers hi triangular or tetrahedral numbers
here now is another way of thinking about this
array as it's counting some combinatorial object
namely numbers of paths and this description of
this array has some immediate advantages first
of all it makes the symmetry between the rows
and the columns obvious the number of paths from
here to here is obviously going to be the same
as the number of paths from here to here our
previous analysis did not reveal that in fact
the triangular numbers were not just appearing
here but we're also appearing down this column
next time we're going to look at the actual nature
of the entries of this important table these are
numbers which actually have formulas associated
to them which is one of the points of algebra
these formulas are called binomial coefficients
and they're quite interesting numbers we'd have
a look at that I hope you're gonna join me for
that I'm Norman wildberger thanks for listening